Document aggregate counter & aggregate metric double average as default (#6021)
elastic/docs-content: manage-data/data-store/data-streams/downsampling-concepts.md

### Downsampling methods [downsampling-methods]

Downsampling supports two methods for reducing multiple values in the same bucket to a single representative result:

* `last_value`: {applies_to}`stack: preview 9.3` {applies_to}`serverless: ga`

>   Stores only the most recent value for each metric in the bucket. This method reduces storage use the most, but it also reduces data accuracy. It applies to all metric types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Stores only the most recent value for each metric in the bucket. This method reduces the storage footprint the most, but it also reduces data accuracy. It applies to all metric types.
```

* `aggregate`
  Stores statistical summaries for the values in each bucket. This method preserves more information than `last_value`, but it requires more storage. It applies to each metric type as follows:
  * `gauge` fields:
    * Stores `min`, `max`, `sum`, and `value_count` as `aggregate_metric_double`.
  * `counter` fields:
    * Stores the first value, and stores up to two data points if a counter reset is detected {applies_to}`stack: ga 9.4` {applies_to}`serverless: ga`. The field type is preserved.
    * In previous versions, only the last value is stored.
  * `histogram` fields {applies_to}`stack: preview 9.3` {applies_to}`serverless: preview`

>     * Merges individual histograms into a single histogram, preserving the field type. The `histogram` field type uses the [T-Digest](elasticsearch://reference/aggregations/search-aggregations-metrics-percentile-aggregation.md) algorithm.

Reviewer: Maybe mention exponential histograms too - they're supported right?

Author: Yes, it meant all histograms but I see your point, better to make it explicit

Author: <img width="739" height="134" alt="Screenshot 2026-04-22 at 18 45 22" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/c2b6befa-43ff-4ebc-9d5b-486776143acc" />

:::{tip}
When downsampling a downsampled index, use the same downsampling method as the source index.
:::

### Source and target index field mappings [downsample-api-mappings]

The target downsampled index uses the same field mappings as the source index, with one exception: `time_series_metric: gauge` fields are mapped to `aggregate_metric_double`.

An `aggregate_metric_double` can be used in `max`, `min`, `sum`, `value_count`, and `avg` aggregations without losing accuracy.

> {applies_to}`stack: ga 9.4` {applies_to}`serverless: ga` In ES|QL, a downsampled gauge stored as `aggregate_metric_double` can still be used as a `double` in other operations, but with reduced accuracy. In this case, the average value for the bucket is used as the single representative value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{applies_to}`stack: ga 9.4` {applies_to}`serverless: ga` In ES|QL, a downsampled gauge stored as `aggregate_metric_double` can still be used as a `double` in other operations, but with reduced accuracy. In this case, the average value for each downsample interval is used as the single representative value.
```
